Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
If you want more labs like this, I highly
recommend Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
NetSim is a network simulator like Packet
Tracer, but it’s far more powerful and contains
over 100 detailed guided labs covering the
CCNA exam topics.
If you want to get NetSim, follow the link
in the description.
In this lab we’ll look at the topic of HSRP
and STP synchronization.
This applies regardless of what first hop
redundancy protocol you’re using, but for
this lab we’ll use HSRP.
Basically, HSRP and STP synchronization means
that the HSRP active should be the STP root
bridge, and the HSRP standby should be the
STP secondary root bridge.
Why should the HSRP active and the STP root
be synchronized or aligned?
It’s to ensure that traffic from the end
hosts follows the most direct path to the
default gateway.
If the HSRP active router isn’t the STP
root, then traffic from PC1 to DSW1 might
not take the direct path to DSW1, it might
take a longer path.
This isn’t a disaster, but it’s obviously
not ideal.
Because STP works by finding the shortest
path to the root, ensuring that the HSRP active
router is synchronized with the STP root means
that traffic will follow the most efficient
path.
In this lab, we’ll make DSW1 the HSRP active
and STP root for VLAN 10, and make DSW2 the
HSRP active and STP root for VLAN 20.
Before configuring HSRP and STP, let’s check
the current state on DSW1.
ENABLE.
SHOW STANDBY BRIEF.
Nothing, so HSRP hasn’t been configured
yet.
Let’s check spanning tree.
SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10.
DSW1 has a root port, G1/0/3 which is connected
to DSW2, so it looks like DSW2 is the root
bridge, not DSW1.
How about VLAN 20?
SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20.
Same thing here.
Now I’ll get right into configuring DSW1.
CONF T. Let’s configure STP first.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10 ROOT PRIMARY.
That should make DSW1 the root for VLAN 10,
now let’s ensure it’s the secondary root
for VLAN 20.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20 ROOT SECONDARY.
Okay, let’s check the status now, VLAN 10
first where DSW1 should be the root.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10.
Great, DSW1 is the root now as it says up
here, and all ports are designated.
And VLAN 20 next.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20.
Now, because we haven’t configured DSW2
yet the ROOT SECONDARY command here actually
made DSW1’s priority lower than DSW2’s
so DSW1 became the root for VLAN 20 also.
That’s fine, after we configure DSW2 it
will become the root for VLAN 20 again.
Now let’s configure HSRP here on DSW1, for
the VLAN10 SVI first.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
I didn’t give any specifics in the description
about the HSRP configurations, but I’ll
make it version 2.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
I’ll make group 10 for VLAN 10.
STANDBY 10 IP, and let’s make the default
gateway .254.
10.0.10.254.
I’ll make DSW1’s priority higher than
the default 100 next.
STANDBY 10 PRIORITY 105.
And enable preemption too, it’s good to
have.
STANDBY 10 PREEMPT.
Okay, VLAN 20 next.
INTERFACE VLAN 20.
Let’s enable version 2 here too.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
And then the virtual IP, .254 again.
STANDBY 20 IP 10.0.20.254.
Note that these HSRP group numbers don’t
actually have to match the VLAN number.
Okay, next I’ll make it’s priority lower
than the default of 100.
STANDBY 20 PRIORITY 95.
And enable preempt.
STANDBY 20 PREEMPT.
Okay, that’s all here on DSW1.
END.
Now I’ll do similar configurations on DSW2.
CONF T. First, make it the secondary root
of VLAN 10.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10 ROOT SECONDARY.
And the primary root for VLAN 20.
SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20 ROOT PRIMARY.
Let’s check the STP status now.
Is it the root for VLAN 20?
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 20.
Yes it is, perfect.
And DSW1 should remain the root for VLAN 10.
DO SHOW SPANNING-TREE VLAN 10.
Perfect, DSW2’s root port is G1/0/3 which
is connected to DSW1.
Next up, HSRP on DSW2.
INTERFACE VLAN 10.
First let’s make the version match.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
And then configure the same virtual IP, the
.254 of the subnet.
STANDBY 10 IP 10.0.10.254.
And let’s lower the priority here, even
though DSW1’s is already higher.
STANDBY 10 PRIORITY 95.
And I’ll enable preemption too.
STANDBY 10 PREEMPT.
Okay, that’s all for VLAN 10, now VLAN 20.
INTERFACE VLAN 20.
STANDBY VERSION 2.
STANDBY 20 IP 10.0.20.254.
STANDBY 20 PRIORITY 105.
STANDBY 20 PREEMPT.
END.
All of the configurations should be good now.
Again, DSW1 should be active in VLAN 10 and
STANDBY in VLAN 20, and DSW2 should be the
opposite.
Active in VLAN 20 and standby in VLAN 10.
Let’s check first here on DSW2 if it’s
the HSRP active in VLAN 20 and standby in
VLAN 10.
SHOW STANDBY BRIEF.
Okay, VLAN 10 looks perfect.
The active is 10.0.10.1, which is DSW1, and
the standby is local, meaning DSW2.
VLAN 20 looks good too.
The active is local and standby is 10.0.20.1,
DSW1.
So it all looks good here on DSW2, but let’s
check on DSW1 also just to be sure.
SHOW STANDBY BRIEF.
Okay, in VLAN 10 the active is local and DSW2
is standby, and the opposite for VLAN 20.
So, we have configured both STP and HSRP as
in the instructions.
This ensures that hosts in VLAN 10 have a
direct path to their default gateway, DSW1,
and hosts in VLAN 20 have a direct path to
their default gateway, DSW2.
Synchronizing the STP and HSRP configurations
like this is a good LAN design principle.
Although to be honest I doubt you’ll be
asked about it on the CCNA exam, in this course
I always try to give you more information
than you need, as long as it’s valuable.
Okay, that’s all for this lab.
Now let’s take a look at a lab in Boson
Software’s NetSim for CCNA.